# Result from Topic Modeling

Uploaded in this folder are the topic modeling results generated by MALLET. This includes both the topics generated, the “keys” files, and the associated probability statistics, the “topics” files. In each of the folders, a guide will be provided in the README, which outlines the specifications I ran in order to generate the topics. However, in the beginning, as I was experimenting with MALLET, I did not document the specifics of each attempt as I was working on fine-tuning the additional stopword list. Regardless of this lapse in data documentation, the results without proper documentation will still be included.

## Results

I was able to identify coherent topics generated by MALLET after 10 rounds of topic modeling with the pre-Revolution texts and after 5 rounds of topic modeling with the post-Revolution texts. A coherent topic in this context means I was able to identify a theme and assign an identifier when looking at the list of words. I utilized the pre-Revolution texts to experiment with MALLET, get comfortable with the program, and fine-tune the stopwords list, which is why there is a difference in the number of rounds it took to generate coherent topics. Every time I added to the stopwords list, I had to re-run the texts through MALLET in order to prepare the texts so that the MALLET programming was able to read them.

### Pre-Revolution

The most successful pre-Revolution topic modeling attempt was pre10.20. The 10 indicates it was the tenth iteration of pre-Revolution texts run through MALLET. The 20 indicates it was the twentieth attempt at generating topics with the tenth iteration of the pre-Revolution texts.

The specifications I fed to MALLET for pre10.20 were:
* number of topics: 20
* number of words per topic: 10
* number of iterations: 62
* optimization: every 10 rounds

62 is the maximum number of iterations MALLET was able to run for this collection of texts.

Below are the results generated by these specifications as MALLET presented them:

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0	0.25	bed indian cold man door warm light hot wretch native 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1	0.25	child son god doctor lord sing life sight extreme week 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2	0.25	newyork wait good boston friend hope blow west ill sail 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;3	0.25	night manner desire woman daughter sleep minister carry late lady 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;4	0.25	chair relation night mother rest difficult piece pray surprise tired 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5	0.25	governor cross entertain handsome pretty woman room house sound neat 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;6	0.25	good people gentleman civil observe early bait newhaven town sheep 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;7	0.25	money merchant land sailor sloop care sabbath spend rise loose 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;8	0.25	man speak guide brother eat steal age indian fit hold 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;9	0.25	horse travel river shore island fire french tongue point conduct 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;10	0.25	open master colony matter concern end meet black person people 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;11	0.25	house walk lodge meeting home tea good evening dinner prospect 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;12	0.25	company meet wind ferry boat fall passenger table inquire tide 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;13	0.25	poor stage fear company lodge safe weary enter dark divert 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;14	0.25	ride hill wife father family estate jameca landlady die impression 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;15	0.25	road ride breakfast agreeable drink stone philadelphia sister bridge diverse 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;16	0.25	tree bad thought guide horse distance wall run foot add 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;17	0.25	journey creature passage answer marry bare english law entertainment bridge 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;18	0.25	beauty pretty country plain hill glad devil world invite cover 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;19	0.25	town house church river country tavern building dine clean idea 

I was able to identify four coherent topics from these results:

<ins>Tea Time:</ins> governor, cross, entertain, handsome, pretty, woman, room, house, sound, neat

<ins>Social Interactions:</ins> house, walk, lodge, meeting, home, tea, good, evening, dinner, prospect

<ins>Travel Fears:</ins> poor, stage, fear, company, lodge, safe, weary, enter, dark, divert

<ins>Establishment:</ins> town, house, church, river, country, tavern, building, dine, clean, idea

### Post-Revolution

The most successful post-Revolution topic modeling attempt was post5.12. The 5 indicates it was the fifth iteration of post-Revolution texts run through MALLET. The 12 indicates it was the twelfth attempt at generating topics with the fifth iteration of the post-Revolution texts.

The specification I fed to MALLET for post5.12 were:
* number of topics: 20
* number of words per topic: 10
* number of iterations: 55 
* optimization: every 10 rounds

55 is the maximum number of iterations MALLET was able to run for this collection of texts.

Below are the results generated by these specifications as MALLET presented them:

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0	0.25	people pittsburgh scarce run good agreeable warm french current canoe 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1	0.25	meet life family intend conduct carry situate town sight monongahela 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2	0.25	read week journal spend end father opportunity trouble character honor 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;3	0.25	walk wagoner good deal company expect doctor wait fear sabbath 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;4	0.25	home hope friend attention letter perfect moment send tea poor 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5	0.25	river shore water wind bank clear indian tree view direct 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;6	0.25	beauty evening fort wild indian ohio continue wide dark inform 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;7	0.25	bed night sleep feel house dirty afraid cross cry serve 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;8	0.25	room wife eat fellow man pennsylvania fast mud worst suspect 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;9	0.25	delight springs dress newyork gentleman dance lake ballston charm meeting 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;10	0.25	mountain road horse ride stop good reach journey bad distance 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;11	0.25	boat cold weather fast difficult fall attend grow gentleman town 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;12	0.25	lady son child girl fatigue account rise marry feel stage 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;13	0.25	good house build poor husband bear worse run log conclude 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;14	0.25	rain land night island noon year country happen severe low 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;15	0.25	town wagon house ride hill wife speak clever comfortable party 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;16	0.25	write feel dear mother love father journey treat favor brother 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;17	0.25	house cross creek hill country breakfast rest pretty prospect spirit 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;18	0.25	talk dutch stone tavern people state inquire wagon drink expect 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;19	0.25	woman man impossible times laugh happy hut fire describe door 

I was able to identify four coherent topics from these results.

<ins>Water Travel:</ins> river, shore, water, wind, bank, clear, indian, tree, view, direct

<ins>Lodging:</ins> bed, night, sleep, feel, house, dirty, afraid, cross, cry serve

<ins>On the Road:</ins> mountain, road, horse, ride, stop, good, reach, journey, bad, distance

<ins>Family:</ins> write, feel, dear, mother, love, father, journey, treat, favor, brother

## Discussion

Out of a twenty-topic pool, I was able to identify four coherent topics for both the pre- and post-Revolution travel writings. The pre-Revolution topics are tea time, social interactions, travel fears, and establishment. Based on the fact that there are two distinct topics focused on social interactions (tea time and the aptly named social interactions), these women obviously considered social interactions to be one of the most intriguing, if not important, parts of traveling. Establishment is an interesting topic, as it could indicate that these women were utilizing establishments, such as churches and taverns, to orient themselves on the road. Travel fears being one of the topics could indicate that travel was more dangerous before the American Revolution.

Meanwhile, the post-Revolution topics are water travel, lodging, on the road, and family. One of the topics being water travel, indicates that travel by water increased and was more easily accessible after the American Revolution, as it was not one of the topics generated by the pre-Revolution texts. The lodging and on the road topics are fairly straightforward and expected topics to arise from a project focused on travel writing. Family, however, is an interesting topic. It could indicate that the format of the travel writing influenced what topics were generated, as three out of the five post-Revolution texts were letters. Since the letters were written to family members for the most part, that could be why a family topic appeared. 

The topics generated reveal interesting but not necessarily surprising information about early American travel writing. The most intriguing revelation is that the topics indicate an improvement or advancement in travel as a whole in early America. However, the topics I was able to assign identifiers to, for both the pre- and post-Revolution text, are largely focused on travel itself. While not surprising as the texts are documenting travel, it does prove the project hypothesis wrong. I was not able to identify societal values in the topics generated by MALLET.

Furthermore, there are no topics related to the American Revolution in either the pre- or post-Revolution topics. The only hint of the American Revolution I was able to find in my research was in the topics generated by post5.13. This attempt generated 50 topics with 10 words per topic. One of the topics generated is as follows:

man, company, encourage, dress, lose, disposition, clever, liberty, world, expect

The words liberty and world point to the American Revolution, as liberty was one of the core principals of the war, and it was a wordly war. However, when looked at with the rest of the words in the topic, the topic lacks coherency. This one topic almost reflects societal values related to the American Revolution, but it doesn’t quite work and therefore proves my hypothesis wrong.

## Final Thoughts

Ultimately, I’ve concluded that topic modeling is just not the right tool to investigate the presence of societal values in early American women’s travel writing. A different text analysis tool, such as AntConc, is probably more suited to the project’s hypothesis. However, I do think that topic modeling is a useful tool to investigate these texts, just with a different hypothesis.
