# Project Methodology

## Corpus Building

The first step of the project was building a corpus. First, what counts as travel writing had to be defined. For this project, the documentation of travel via travel narratives, letters, and diaries counts as travel writing. Next was the archival research, which was directed by the following set of requirements:

- Written by a woman who was born and raised in the American Colonies
- A record of travel that occurred within British Colonial America/the United States
- Written before 1812
- An account of voluntary travel

While early America hosted a variety of women, I made the decision to focus on white, upper-class women because of the juxtaposition between the freedom they were allowed due to their whiteness and the restrictions they experienced due to their gender. As the project is concerned with the societal values of those who lived in British Colonial America, or the early United States, it was decided the author needed to be raised in America in order to reflect such values. Additionally, since this project is focused on the societal values of those that lived within British Colonial America, travel was contained within the U.S. This project is mainly interested in early American culture and society, and 1812 was selected as the cutoff point for early America. This is because the War of 1812 took place in 1812 and was a unifying, nation-building identity event as it was the first international conflict the United States was involved in that was not centered on Native American conflict. Captivity narratives were excluded from this project, as I was more interested in exploring casual depictions of societal values rather than the extreme societal values that typically appear in captivity narratives.

While the 13 colonies were British colonial institutions, early America was a mixing pot of cultures as individuals from various locations across Europe, as well as the Indigenous peoples of North America, lived in close contact. Because of this, it’s difficult to identify what exactly is an “American” societal value. However, my aim is to identify the societal values that the individuals living in early America held. Whether or not those societal values are “American” is debatable. Rather than trying to identify what American societal values are, I am attempting to identify what societal values these women held.

  After extensive research, a corpus of ten different women’s travel writings was created. Five were written before the American Revolution and five were written after the American Revolution. Eight out of ten narratives are pulled from the *Alexander Street: North American Women’s Letters and Diaries* database, with the addition of Hannah Callender Sansom’s and Elizabeth House Trist’s travel writings that are not from the database.

## Topic Modeling

The next step after creating the corpus was topic modeling. Topic modeling is a digital humanities method where a tool generates topics that are composed of words that co-occur throughout the text. The topics are a string of related words that require interpretation. The topic modeling tool chosen for this project is MALLET, MAchine Learning for LanguagE Toolkit, an open-source text analysis tool. I installed MALLET on a MacOS system and ran MALLET through the command line. 

In order for MALLET to be able to read the travel writings, the text has to be prepared in various ways, including what is known as tokenizing and lemmatizing the texts. Tokenizing is the process of transforming the text into a string of words, while lemmatizing is the process of reducing words to their base form. The first step was to put the travel writings into Google Docs so I could edit them. I copied and pasted eight of the writings from the *Alexander Street: North American Women’s Letters and Diaries* database; however, I hand-transcribed Hannah Callender Sansom’s and Elizabeth House Trist’s travel writings from their respective book. Elizabeth House Trist’s travel narrative had multiple torn pages, and as a result, there were various incomplete words. In order to stay faithful to what was written, I decided to include the incomplete words in the Google Docs transcription. I did occasionally complete words, but only when I was 100% sure of what the word was. Once all the travel writings were in Google Docs, I went through and standardized the spelling of words across all the writings. I also corrected misspelled words, which I determined were misspelled using a combination of best judgment and reading the surrounding sentence. If I was unsure of a word, I did not edit it. When standardizing the text, I also removed any headers, such as dates and location, and sign-offs unless they contained an abundant amount of additional information. This is part of the tokenization process, which also included reducing words to their base form. For example, ran and running were changed to run. The next step in preparing the text was to tokenize the text, which involved removing special characters, such as periods, commas, and apostrophes, removing capital letters, and spelling out numbers rather than leaving them in their numerical form. I prepared all of the text for MALLET by hand and did not use any digital tools or programs.

After preparing the text, the travel writings were then separated into what MALLET calls documents, which are short chunks of text; MALLET recommends documents contain roughly 100-500 words. There is a debate concerning how text should be sectioned into documents, whether documents should follow the text’s grammatical structure and end at the end of a sentence, or if document size should be determined solely by word count. Due to varying and inconsistent grammatical structure across the travel writings, I decided to section the text into documents according to word count. In order to have consistent document length, the writings were separated into documents of approximately 150 words for a total of 381 documents. While not all of the documents are 150 words in length, all of the documents do fall within 9 words of 150. 

MALLET is only able to read plain text files, so the next step was to download all 381 documents as plain text files. Once all the documents were downloaded as plain text files, they were uploaded into MALLET.

Once the documents were uploaded, I experimented extensively with MALLET. I topic modeled the pre-Revolution documents and the post-Revolution documents separately. Before focusing on generating final topics, I had to remove stopwords.

MALLET has a built-in stopword list, however, I created an additional list of stopwords which is custom to my corpus. I included numbers that appeared in the text as well as people’s names. I decided to include all names written in the travel writings because there was a repetition of names and the ten women were rarely discussing the same person. As I experimented with MALLET, I added words that were causing issues. I utilized the same stopword list for all of the topic modeling.

Initially, I started with 10 topics with 10 words per topic. MALLET has iteration and optimization commands, so I increased the iterations in increments of ten and optimized the results every ten iterations, which is what MALLET recommends. I experimented with increasing and decreasing both the number of topics generated and the number of words per topic. I was looking for coherent topics, which in this context means I was able to identify a theme and assign an identifier when looking at the list of words. I, therefore, utilized the “eyeball” technique for determining whether or not a topic was coherent (Gillings and Hardie 2023). I was able to generate coherent topics by generating 20 topics with 10 words per topic. However, not all 20 of the topics generated were coherent, rather, I was able to pick out a few coherent topics. The topics I was able to identify were mainly related to travel.

I attempted to identify societal values from the list of topics. I did so by looking for topics related to class, gender, race, religion, nation, liberty, and patriotism, among others. However, I was ultimately unable to identify any topics related to societal values. So, even though I was able to curate coherent topics, the project hypothesis that topic modeling would reveal the societal values that the women in the corpus held was ultimately incorrect.

### Sources

Gillings, Mathew, and Andrew Hardie. June 2023. “The interpretation of topic models for scholarly analysis: An evaluation and critique of current practice.” *Digital Scholarship in the Humanities* 38 (2): 530–543. https://doi-org.ezproxy.neu.edu/10.1093/llc/fqac075.
