# Next Steps

There are many possible next steps for this project. That being said, the ones that seem most interesting to me fit into two categories, being methological changes and case studies.

## Methodological Changes

One possible next step would be to try topic modeling again but with different methodological decisions. These are the following methodological changes I would implement:

* Lemmatizing the travel writings through a computer program rather than by hand
* Dividing the travel writing into documents according to grammatical structure rather than by word count
*  Interpreting the topics generated by MALLET with a close-reading technique rather than the “eyeball” technique 

These methodological changes may reveal something new about the project that I didn’t encounter in my research, and may provide different answers to the project research questions.

Less of a methodological change and more a methodological addition, another possible next step would be to utilize additional text analysis tools, such as AntConc, in addition to topic modeling. Since topic modeling did not reveal the societal values that the women in the project corpus held, it can be concluded that topic modeling is not the right tool to analyze societal values in writing. It’s possible that a different text analysis tool, such as AntConc, is better suited to investigating what societal values are present in the travel writings analyzed here. Specifically, AntConc can be used to investigate word frequency, which could be an interesting way to investigate the presence of societal values in travel writing.

## Case Studies

While topic modeling was ultimately unsuccessful in investigating societal values in these women’s travel writings, it could still be a useful tool for examining the travel narratives. Specifically, I think utilizing topic modeling to create case studies would be particularly interesting. There are two possible case studies that stand out to me, which are:

* A case study focused on the women who either began or ended, or began and ended, their journey in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. There are four women who would be included in this case study and they are Elizabeth Sandwith Drinker, Sarah Eve, Elizabeth House Trist, and Margaret Bayard Smith. As all these women traveled in the same area at some point of their journey, it would be interesting to see if they discuss similar themes in their writing.
* A case study that compares the earliest travel writing in the project corpus, which is Sarah Kemble Knight’s travel narrative, with the latest travel writing in the project corpus, which is Margaret Van Horn Dwight’s travel narrative. As these journeys took place almost a century apart, it would be interesting to see if they depict similar themes about travel. Alternatively, it would be interesting if the advancements made to travel resulted in their respective narratives depicting different travel themes.
